Here's the same example we already worked on where we already do select things
and now here
let's start simple and let's select a list item here.
Now of course, you learned about different ways of selecting it and I want to select this second list
item actually.
Now for this second list item,
there are a couple of ways which will not work, since it's the second list item not the first one for
example,
you won't be able to select it with document query selector li because that selects the first matching
element,
so the first list item in this case that is found and that would be this list item,
not this one.
What would work is if you take the class, so .list-item here like this because since this is the
first element with that class, it would work
but maybe you have a setup where this is not the case, let's say
and let's actually change it as such,
on this first list item, you have the same class,
now all of a sudden, this way of selecting also won't work anymore as soon as we reload this page
because now this will select the first match and now that we change this, the first matching list item is
this
list item here now that I reloaded the page.
So, what can we do to select this item then?
Well we can use some DOM traversal techniques which I already showed you. Of course in reality if you
are building this page, you could also add an ID attribute or find other ways of making this uniquely
selectable with the query methods you already learned but it's important to also be available to interpret
the DOM.
So one way of accessing it would be to get access to the parent unordered list element here, to this
element node and then have a look at its child nodes or child elements and then select the second child
here because that would be this list item.
This can be done
here in the console by getting access to the unordered list for example with documents query selector ul,
that gives us the first fitting element so since we only have one unordered list in the document,
it will give us access to unordered list here and now on this unordered list,
of course we can use the query selector to select any elements nested in there but we will have
the same problem as before.
If I search for list items, I get the first matching one which is this,
not this, the same if I use a class so this won't really help us here but what we can do is we can use
some of the things I showed you on the slide, for example you can output children here. If you look at
ul children,
this gives you a so-called HTML collection which is an array-like object in the end, so it's not a real
array but it supports looping and so on,
so what I already showed you and there we know the second element is the one we want, so with ul children
and then index one to get the second element,
we would get access to exactly that list item I was talking about and you'll see it selected here on the
left, right?
If I type this here even without hitting enter, it is already selected. So this would be one way.
This also is a great place to understand the difference between child nodes and child element nodes
in case it's not fully clear yet.
Here I'm using children and this gives me access to all child element nodes, so only child nodes that
are based on HTML tags, HTML elements, text nodes are excluded here.
Now please keep in mind that as I mentioned earlier in this module, text nodes are also part of the
DOM tree, of that tree that is created here by the browser to reflect your HTML document and that there,
even the whitespace which you add in your HTML file for readability reasons is treated as a text
node because it is text in your HTML file,
right? So therefore, actually in our HTML code, here of course I also have a bunch of whitespace in
front of the body and in front of the header
and of course also in front of the list item here,
I also have a line break between the unordered list and the list item.
So here the difference
we can actually see is that children gives me this collection of element nodes that are direct
children of this unordered list,
so no other descendants and also and no other types of nodes.
If we use child nodes instead,
now you see instead of this HTML collection array-like object, we now have a node list array-like
object
and if we output this, indeed we see there's way more content in there.
There are a bunch of text nodes as you can now clearly tell
and of course also our element nodes but also the text nodes because child nodes selects all child nodes,
whereas children only select child element nodes and child nodes therefore also includes text nodes and
here this text for example, in front of this first list item, that is exactly this whitespace which you in the
end have here.
So if we have a look at this text here, data here is actually its text content,
we haven't learned about this yet but where you have text content on element nodes to assign a text
and automatically create a child text node for an element node, data on a text node sets the text of this
text node
and here this is the line break character and then we have a bunch of whitespace thereafter, so a bunch
of empty whitespace and that's just what we have here.
We have a line break after the unordered list and then we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 pieces of whitespace here
and that's exactly what we have here we have the line break and then we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 pieces of whitespace
here.
So this is this text node,
now why is this not rendered here?
It's not this whitespace in front of the bullet point in case you're wondering. Well it's not rendered
because we have no style that would render it. The default for HTML in most tags is or the default for
the browser for most tags I should say is that it basically omits empty whitespace that has no
purpose,
so whitespace like here between item and one is of course rendered but whitespace at the beginning or
at the end of the content of an element is typically omitted. You can change this with a special style
though if we expand this down there and you go to styles for the unordered list which holds these elements
we just had a look at, so which holds all these child nodes, there if we add whitespace pre,
now you see it here in the left as well, you see there's a bunch of whitespace and the line breaks because
this is some specific CSS styling which overrides the browser default of basically ignoring, leading
or excess whitespace and it renders it instead,
so now instead of ignoring all that extra whitespace, it is getting rendered which is why the list item
is still as big as before
but of course we can see there seems to be some extra content in front of it
and whilst we don't see that here in the elements tab or whilst this is not displayed here as a text
node, we can see it here in the console,
it's just this text node, if I hover over it, it's now selected,
this is this extra whitespace that is getting rendered, a line break and then also all the other
extra pieces of whitespace we have in there.
So that's children and child nodes which allows us to select child nodes, often you want to work with
children because in most cases you're interested in getting access to the child element nodes
but if you need access to all nodes, you can use child nodes like this
and this by the way is then also how you can get access to text nodes, for example with child nodes and
then by using the right index. Now besides children and child nodes, we also have two other useful properties,
let's say you select that the unordered list with query selector ul and there, you want to get access
to the first or the last list item.
Now again, of course you can always do query selector li last of type or first of type, that will
work but for one, this will cost a little bit of performance because query selector has to scan the
entire page and then scan this quite complex CSS query and find the fitting elements and it also
just might be redundant if you already got access to the unordered list any ways.
If you then know you want to work with the first list item, you can use first child to get the first
child node, which in this case is a text node or first element child to get the first element child node
which would be the first list item here
and of course the same is true in the opposite direction.
We also have last child for the last child node which again is a text node here or last element child
which for this unordered list is the last list item.
So this might simply be quicker and cheaper to get access to than with a brand new query on the entire
document.
Of course as a compromise, you could also go for query selector li last of type, that's certainly better than
scanning the entire document but it might still be faster to simply use last element child if you
know that you want the last element child in the end.